This paper appears in ECOOP '98, the 12th European Conference on Object-
Oriented Programming, Brussels, Belgium, July 20-24, 1998, pp. 186-211.



                                          Predicate Dispatching:
                                       A Uni ed Theory of Dispatch
                                     Michael Ernst, Craig Kaplan, and Craig Chambers
                                        Department of Computer Science and Engineering
                                                   University of Washington
                                                Seattle, WA, USA 98195-2350
                                                   ;   ;
                                         fmernst csk chambersg@cs.washington.edu
                                  http://www.cs.washington.edu/research/projects/cecil/




                             Abstract. Predicate dispatching generalizes previous method dispatch
                             mechanisms by permitting arbitrary predicates to control method ap-
                             plicability and by using logical implication between predicates as the
                             overriding relationship. The method selected to handle a message send
                             can depend not just on the classes of the arguments, as in ordinary
                             object-oriented dispatch, but also on the classes of subcomponents, on
                             an argument's state, and on relationships between objects. This simple
                             mechanism subsumes and extends object-oriented single and multiple
                             dispatch, ML-style pattern matching, predicate classes, and classi ers,
                             which can all be regarded as syntactic sugar for predicate dispatching.
                             This paper introduces predicate dispatching, gives motivating examples,
                             and presents its static and dynamic semantics. An implementation of
                             predicate dispatching is available.

                       1 Introduction
                       Many programming languages support some mechanism for dividing the body
                       of a procedure into a set of cases, with a declarative mechanism for selecting the
                       right case for each dynamic invocation of the procedure. Case selection can be
                       broken down into tests for applicability (a case is a candidate for invocation if
                       its guard is satis ed) and overriding (which selects one of the applicable cases
                       for invocation).
                            Object-oriented languages use overloaded methods as the cases and generic
                       functions (implicit or explicit) as the procedures. A method is applicable if the
                       run-time class of the receiver argument is the same as or a subclass of the
                       class on which the receiver is specialized. Multiple dispatching [BKK+ 86,Cha92]
                       enables testing the classes of all of the arguments. One method overrides another
                       if its specializer classes are subclasses of the other's, using either lexicographic
                       (CLOS [Ste90]) or pointwise (Cecil [Cha93a]) ordering.
                            Predicate classes [Cha93b] automatically classify an object of class A as an
                       instance of virtual subclass B (a subclass of A) whenever B's predicate (an ar-
                       bitrary expression typically testing the runtime state of an object) is true. This
                       creation of virtual class hierarchies makes method dispatching applicable even

                                                               186
in cases where the e ective class of an object may change over time. Classi-
  ers [HHM90b] and modes [Tai93] are similar mechanisms for reclassifying an
object into one of a number of subclasses based on a case-statement-like test of
arbitrary boolean conditions.
    Pattern matching (as in ML [MTH90]) bases applicability tests on the run-
time datatype constructor tags of the arguments and their subcomponents. As
with classi ers and modes, textual ordering determines overriding. Some lan-
guages, such as Haskell [HJW+ 92], allow arbitrary boolean guards to accom-
pany patterns, restricting applicability. Views [Wad87] extend pattern matching
to abstract data types by enabling them to o er interfaces like various concrete
datatypes.
    Predicate dispatching integrates, generalizes, and provides a uniform inter-
face to these similar but previously incomparable mechanisms. A method dec-
laration speci es its applicability via a predicate expression, which is a logical
formula over class tests (i.e., tests that an object is of a particular class or one
of its subclasses) and arbitrary boolean-valued expressions from the underlying
programming language. A method is applicable when its predicate expression
evaluates to true. Method m1 overrides method m2 when m1 's predicate logi-
cally implies that of m2 ; this relationship is computed at compile time. Static
typechecking veri es that, for all possible combinations of arguments to a generic
function, there is always a single most-speci c applicable method. This ensures
that there are no \message not understood" errors (called \match not exhaus-
tive" in ML) or \message ambiguous" errors at run-time.
    Predicate expressions capture the basic primitive mechanisms underlying a
wide range of declarative dispatching mechanisms. Combining these primitives
in an orthogonal and general manner enables new sorts of dispatching that are
not expressible by previous dispatch mechanisms. Predicate dispatching pre-
serves several desirable properties from its object-oriented heritage, including
that methods can be declared in any order and that new methods can be added
to existing generic functions without modifying the existing methods or clients;
these properties are not shared by pattern-matching-based mechanisms.
    Section 2 introduces the syntax, semantics, and use of predicate dispatching
through a series of examples. Section 3 de nes its dynamic and static semantics
formally. Section 4 discusses predicate tautology testing, which is the key mech-
anism required by the dynamic and static semantics. Section 5 surveys related
work. Section 6 concludes with a discussion of future directions for research.

2 Overview
This section demonstrates some of the capabilities of predicate dispatching by
way of a series of examples. We incrementally present a high-level syntax which
appears in full in Fig. 6; Fig. 1 lists supporting syntactic domains. Words and
symbols in boldface represent terminals. Angle brackets denote zero or more
comma-separated repetitions of an item. Square brackets contain optional ex-
pressions.

                                        187
E    2 expr        The set of expressions in the underlying programming language
Body 2 method-body The set of method bodies in the underlying programming language
T 2 type           The set of types in the underlying programming language
c 2 class-id       The namespace of classes
m 2 method-id The namespace of methods and elds
f 2 eld-id         The namespace of methods and elds
p 2 pred-id        The namespace of predicate abstractions
v; w 2 var-id      The namespace of variables

Fig.1. Syntactic domains and variables. Method and eld names appear in the same
namespace; the method-id or eld-id name is chosen for clarity in the text.

   Predicate dispatching is parameterized by the syntax and semantics of the
host programming language in which predicate dispatching is embedded. The
ideas of predicate dispatching are independent of the host language; this paper
speci es only a predicate dispatching sublanguage, with expr the generic nonter-
minal for expressions in the host language. Types and signatures are used when
the host language is statically typed and omitted when it is dynamically typed.

2.1 Dynamic dispatch
Each method implementation has a predicate expression which speci es when
the method is applicable. Class tests are predicate expressions, as are negations,
conjunctions, and disjunctions of predicate expressions.
  method-sig ::= signature method-id ( h type i ) : type
  method-decl ::= method method-id ( h formal-pattern i )
                       [ when pred-expr ] method-body
    formal-pattern ::= var-id
    pred-expr      ::= expr @ class-id          succeeds if expr evaluates to an instance
                                                  of class-id or one of its subclasses
                    j   not pred-expr           negation
                    j   pred-expr and pred-expr conjunction (short-circuited)
                    j   pred-expr or pred-expr disjunction (short-circuited)
    Predicate expressions are evaluated in an environment with the method's for-
mal arguments bound (see Sect. 3 for details). An omitted when clause indicates
that the method handles all (type-correct) arguments.
    Method signature declarations give the type signature shared by a family
of method implementations in a generic function. A message send expression
need examine only the corresponding method signature declaration to determine
its type-correctness, while a set of overloaded method implementations must
completely and unambiguously implement the corresponding signature in order
to be type-correct.
    Predicate dispatching can simulate both singly- and multiply-dispatched meth-
ods by specializing formal parameters on a class (via the \@class-id" syntax).

                                           188
Specialization limits the applicability of a method to objects that are instances
of the given class or one of its subclasses. More generally, predicate dispatching
supports the construction of arbitrary conjunctions, disjunctions, and negations
of class tests. The following example uses predicate dispatching to implement
the Zip function which converts a pair of lists into a list of pairs:1
  type List;
    class Cons subtypes List { head:Any, tail:List };
    class Nil subtypes List;

  signature Zip(List, List):List;
  method Zip(l1, l2) when l1@Cons and l2@Cons {
      return Cons(Pair(l1.head, l2.head), Zip(l1.tail, l2.tail)); }
  method Zip(l1, l2) when l1@Nil or l2@Nil { return Nil; }

    The rst Zip method applies when both of its arguments are instances of
Cons   (or some subclass). The second Zip method uses disjunction to test whether
either argument is an instance of Nil (or some subclass). The type checker can
verify statically that the two implementations of Zip are mutually exclusive and
exhaustive over all possible arguments that match the signature, ensuring that
there will be no \message not understood" or \message ambiguous" errors at
run-time, without requiring the cases to be put in any particular order.
     There are several unsatisfactory alternatives to the use of implication to de-
termine overriding relationships. ML-style pattern matching requires all cases to
be written in one place and put in a particular total order, resolving ambiguities
in favor of the rst successfully matching pattern. Likewise, a lexicographic or-
dering for multimethods [Ste90] is error-prone and unnatural, and programmers
are not warned of potential ambiguities. In a traditional (singly- or multiply-
dispatched) object-oriented language without the ability to order cases, either
the base case of Zip must be written as the default case for all pairs of List ob-
jects (unnaturally, and unsafely in the face of future additions of new subclasses
of List), or three separate but identical base methods must be written: one for
Nil Any, one for Any Nil, and a third for Nil Nil to resolve the ambiguity
                                                  

between the rst two. In our experience with object-oriented languages (using a
pointwise, not lexicographic, ordering), these triplicate base methods for binary
messages occur frequently.
     As a syntactic convenience, class tests can be written in the formal argument
list:
      formal-pattern ::= [ var-id ] [ @ class-id ] like var-id @ class-id in pred-expr
The class name can be omitted if the argument is not dispatched upon, and
the formal name can be omitted if the argument is not used elsewhere in the
predicate or method body.
    The rst Zip method above could then be rewritten as
1 Any is the top class, subclassed by all other classes, and Pair returns an object
  containing its two arguments.

                                         189
  method Zip(l1@Cons, l2@Cons) {
    return Cons(Pair(l1.head, l2.head), Zip(l1.tail, l2.tail)); }

This form uses an implicit conjunction of class tests, like a multimethod.

2.2 Pattern matching
Predicates can test the run-time classes of components of an argument, just as
pattern matching can query substructures, by suxing the @class test with a
record-like list of eld names and corresponding class tests; names can be bound
to eld contents at the same time.
    pred-expr ::= . . .
                  j expr @ specializer
    specializer ::= class-id [ f h eld-pat i g ]
     eld-pat ::= eld-id [ = var-id ] [ @ specializer ]
A specializer succeeds if all of the speci ed elds (or results of invoking methods
named by eld-id) satisfy their own specializers, in which case the var-ids are
bound to the eld values or method results. As with formal-pattern, the formal
name or specializer may be omitted.
    Our syntax for pattern matching on records is analogous to that for creating
a record: { x := 7, y := 22 } creates a two-component record, binding the x
 eld to 7 and the y eld to 22, while { x = xval } pattern-matches against a
record containing an x eld, binding the new variable xval to the contents of that
 eld and ignoring any other elds that might be present. The similarity between
the record construction and matching syntaxes follows ML. Our presentation
syntax also uses curly braces in two other places: for record type speci ers (as
in the declaration of the Cons class, above) and to delimit code blocks (as in the
de nitions of the Zip methods, above).
    The following example, adapted from our implementation of an optimizing
compiler, shows how a ConstantFold method can dispatch for binary operators
whose arguments are constants and whose operator is integer addition:
 type Expr;
   signature ConstantFold(Expr):Expr;
   -- default constant-fold optimization: do nothing
   method ConstantFold(e) { return e; }

   type AtomicExpr subtypes Expr;
     class VarRef subtypes AtomicExpr { ... };
     class IntConst subtypes AtomicExpr { value:int };
     ... -- other atomic expressions here

   type Binop;
     class IntPlus subtypes Binop { ... };
     class IntMul subtypes Binop { ... };
     ... -- other binary operators here




                                         190
   class BinopExpr subtypes Expr { op:Binop, arg1:Expr, arg2:Expr, ... };
     -- override default to constant-fold binops with constant arguments
     method ConstantFold(e@BinopExpr{ op@IntPlus, arg1@IntConst, arg2@IntConst }) {
       return new IntConst{ value := e.arg1.value + e.arg2.value }; }
   ... -- more similarly expressed cases for other binary and unary operators here

   The ability in pattern matching to test for constants of built-in types is a
simple extension of class tests. In a prototype-based language, @ operates over
objects as well as classes, as in \answer @ 42".
   As with pattern matching, testing the representation of components of an
object makes sense when the object and the tested components together imple-
ment a single abstraction. We do not advocate using pattern matching to test
components of objects in a way that crosses natural abstraction boundaries.

2.3 Boolean expressions
To increase the expressiveness of predicate dispatching, predicates may test arbi-
trary boolean expressions from the underlying programming language. Addition-
ally, names may be bound to values, for use later in the predicate expressions
and in the method body. Expressions from the underlying programming lan-
guage that appear in predicate expressions should have no externally observable
side e ects.2
    pred-expr ::= . . .
                j   test expr          succeeds if expr evaluates to true
                j   let var-id := expr evaluate expr and bind var-id to its value;
                                          always succeeds
    The following extension to the ConstantFold example illustrates these fea-
tures. Recall that in { value=v }, the left-hand side is a eld name and the
right-hand side is a variable being bound.
  -- Handle case of adding zero to anything (but don't be ambiguous
  -- with existing method for zero plus a constant).
  method ConstantFold(
            e@BinopExpr{ op@IntPlus, arg1@IntConst{ value=v }, arg2=a2 })
    when test(v == 0) and not(a2@IntConst) {
    return a2; }
  method ConstantFold(
            e@BinopExpr{ op@IntPlus, arg1=a1, arg2@IntConst{ value=v } })
    when test(v == 0) and not(a1@IntConst) {
    return a1; }

  ... -- other special cases for operations on 0,1 here

2 We do not presently enforce this restriction, but there is no guarantee regarding in
  what order or how many times predicate expressions are evaluated.

                                         191
2.4 Predicate abstractions
Named predicate abstractions can factor out recurring tests and give names to
semantically meaningful concepts in the application domain. Named predicates
abstract over both tests and variable bindings |the two capabilities of inline
predicate expressions |by both succeeding or failing and returning a record-
like set of bindings. These bindings resemble the elds of a record or class, and
similar support is given to pattern matching against a subset of the results of
a named predicate invocation. Predicate abstractions thus can act like views
or virtual subclasses of some object (or tuple of objects), with the results of
predicate abstractions acting like the virtual elds of the virtual class. If the
properties of an object tested by a collection of predicates are mutable, the
object may be given di erent virtual subclass bindings at di erent times in its
life, providing the bene ts of using classes to organize code even in situations
where an object's \class" is not xed.
    pred-sig    ::= predsignature pred-id ( h type i )
                       [ return f h eld-id : type i g ]
    pred-decl ::= predicate pred-id ( h formal-pattern i )
                       [ when pred-expr ] [ return f h eld-id := expr i g ]
    pred-expr ::= . . .
                  j pred-id ( h expr i ) [ => f h eld-pat i g ]
                                           test predicate abstraction
    specializer ::= class-spec [ f h eld-pat i g ]
    class-spec ::= class-id                expr @ class-id is a class test
                  j pred-id                expr @ pred-id [ f : : : g ] is alternate syntax
                                             for pred-id (expr) [ =>f : : : g ]
    A predicate abstraction takes a list of arguments and succeeds or fails as
determined by its own predicate expression. A succeeding predicate abstraction
invocation can expose bindings of names to values it computed during its evalu-
ation, and the caller can retrieve any subset of the predicate abstraction's result
bindings. Predicate signatures specify the type interface used in typechecking
predicate abstraction callers and implementations. In this presentation, we pro-
hibit recursive predicates.
    Simple predicate abstractions can be used just like ordinary classes:
  predicate on_x_axis(p@point)
    when (p@cartesianPoint and test(p.y == 0))
      or (p@polarPoint and (test(p.theta == 0) or test(p.theta == pi)));

  method draw(p@point) { ... }               -- draw the point
  method draw(p@on_x_axis) { ... }           -- use a contrasting color so point is visible
    In the following example, taken from our compiler implementation, CFG_2succ
is a control ow graph (CFG) node with two successors. Each successor is marked
with whether it is a loop exit (information which, in our implementation, is dy-
namically maintained when the CFG is modi ed) and the innermost loop it does

                                           192
not exit. It is advantageous for an iterative data ow algorithm to propagate val-
ues along the loop exit only after reaching a xed point within the loop; such an
algorithm would dispatch on the LoopExit predicate. Similarly, the algorithm
could switch from iterative to non-iterative mode when exiting the outermost
loop, as indicated by TopLevelLoopExit.
  predsignature LoopExit(CFGnode)
    return { loop:CFGloop };
  predicate LoopExit(n@CFG_2succ{ next_true = t, next_false = f })
    when test(t.is_loop_exit) or test(f.is_loop_exit)
    return { loop := outermost(t.containing_loop, f.containing_loop) };
  predicate TopLevelLoopExit(n@LoopExit{ loop@TopLevelScope });

    Only one de nition per predicate abstraction is permitted; App. B relaxes
this restriction.
    Because object identity is not a ected by these di erent views on an object,
named predicate abstractions are more exible than coercions in environments
with side-e ects. Additionally, a single object can be classi ed in multiple in-
dependent ways by di erent predicate abstractions without being forced to de-
  ne all the possible conjunctions of independent predicates as explicit classes,
relieving some of the problems associated with a mix-in style of class organiza-
tion [HHM90b,HHM90a].
2.5 Classi ers
Classi ers [HHM90b] are a convenient syntax for imposing a linear ordering on a
collection of predicates, ensuring mutual exclusion. They combine the state test-
ing of predicate classes and the total ordering of pattern matching. An optional
otherwise case, which executes if none of the predicates in the classi er eval-
uates to true, adds the guarantee of complete coverage. Multiple independent
classi cations of a particular class or object do not interfere with one another.
classi er-decl ::= classify ( h formal-pattern i )
                    h as pred-id when pred-expr [ return f h eld-id := expr i g ] i
                    [ as pred-id otherwise [ return f h eld-id := expr i g ] ]
    Here is an example of the use of classi ers:
  class Window { ... }

  classify(w@Window)
    as Iconified when test(w.iconified)
    as FullScreen when test(w.area() == RootWindow.area())
    as Big when test(w.area() > RootWindow.area()/2)
    as Small otherwise;

  method move(w@FullScreen, x@int, y@int) { }           -- nothing to do
  method move(w@Big, x@int, y@int) { ... }              -- move a wireframe outline
  method move(w@Small, x@int, y@int) { ... }            -- move an opaque window
  method move(w@Iconified, x@int, y@int) { ... }        -- modify icon coordinates
  -- resize, maximize, and iconify similarly test these predicates

                                       193
 method-sig       ::= signature method-id ( h type i ) : type
 method-decl      ::= method method-id ( h var-id i ) when pred-expr method-body
 pred-sig         ::= predsignature pred-id ( h type i ) return f h eld-id : type i g
 pred-decl        ::= predicate pred-id ( h var-id i ) when pred-expr
                        return f h eld-id := expr i g
 P; Q 2 pred-expr ::= var-id @ class-id            succeeds if var-id is an instance
                                                      of class-id or a subclass
                    j test var-id                  succeeds if var-id's value is true
                    j let var-id := expr           evaluate expr and bind var-id
                                                      to that value; always succeeds
                    j pred-id ( h var-id i ) => f h eld-id = var-id i g
                                                   test predicate abstraction
                    j true                         always succeeds
                    j not pred-expr                negation
                    j pred-expr and pred-expr      conjunction (short-circuited)
                    j pred-expr or pred-expr       disjunction (short-circuited)

Fig.2. Abstract syntax of the core language. Words and symbols in boldface represent
terminals. Angle brackets denote zero or more comma-separated repetitions of an item.
Square brackets contain optional expressions. The text uses parentheses around pred-
exprs to indicate order of operations. Each predicate may be de ned only once (App. B
relaxes this restriction), and recursive predicates are forbidden.

    Classi ers introduce no new primitives, but provide syntactic support for a
common programming idiom. To force the classi cation to be mutually exclusive,
each case is transformed into a predicate which includes the negation of the
disjunction of all previous predicates (for details, see App. A). Therefore, an
object is classi ed by some case only when it cannot be classi ed by any earlier
case.

3 Dynamic and static semantics
The rest of this paper formalizes the dynamic and static semantics of a core
predicate dispatching sublanguage. Figure 2 presents the abstract syntax of the
core sublanguage which is used throughout this section. Appendix A de nes
desugaring rules that translate the high-level syntax of Fig. 6 into the core
syntax.
    In the remainder of this paper, we assume that all variable names are distinct
so that the semantic rules can ignore the details of avoiding variable capture.

3.1 Dynamic semantics
This section explains how to select the most-speci c applicable method at each
message send. This selection relies on two key tests on predicated methods:
whether a method is applicable to a call, and whether one method overrides
another.

                                        194
 ; 2 value                           Values in the underlying programming language
b 2 ftrue; falseg                    Mathematical booleans
K 2 (var-id ! value)                 Environments mapping variables to values
             [ (pred-id ! pred-decl)   and predicate names to predicate declarations
lookup(v; K ) !      Look up variable v in environment K , returning the value .
K [v := ] ! K 0      Bind name v to value in environment K , resulting in the new
                     environment K 0. Any existing binding for v is overridden.
eval(E; K ) !        Evaluate expression E in environment K , returning the value .
instanceof( ; c) ! b Determine whether value is an instance of c or a subclass of c.
accept( ) ! b        Coerce arbitrary program values to true or false, for use with test.
Fig.3. Dynamic semantics domains and helper functions. Evaluation rules appear in
Fig. 4. The host programming language supplies functions eval, instanceof, and accept.

     A method is applicable if its predicate evaluates to true. Predicate evaluation
also provides an extended environment in which the method's body is executed.
Bindings created via let in a predicate may be used in a method body, predicate
return clause, or the second conjunct of a conjunction whose rst conjunct
created the binding. Such bindings permit reuse of values without recomputation,
as well as simplifyingand clarifying the code. Figures 3 and 4 de ne the execution
model of predicate evaluation.
     Predicate dispatching considers one method m1 to override another method
m2 exactly when m1 's predicate implies m2 's predicate and not vice versa. Sec-
tion 4 describes how to compute the overriding relation, which can be performed
at compile time.
     Given the evaluation model for predicate expressions and the ability to com-
pare predicate expressions for overriding, the execution of generic function invo-
cations is straightforward. Suppose that generic function m is de ned with the
following cases:
                       method m(v1, : : : , vn ) when P1 Body 1
                       method m(v1, : : : , vn ) when P2 Body 2
                      ..
                       .
                       method m(v1, : : : , vn ) when Pk Body k
To evaluate the invocation m(E1, : : : , En) in the environment K, rst obtain
  i = eval(Ei ; K) for all i = 1; : : :; n. Then, for j = 1; : : :; k, obtain a truth
value bj and a new environment Kj through Pj ; K[v1 := 1 ; : : :; vn := n]
                                                   h                                i )

hbj ; Kj , as in the predicate invocation rules of Fig. 4.3
         i

     Now let I be the set of integers i such that bi = true, and nd i0 I such  2

that Pi0 overrides all others in Pi i2I . The result of evaluating m(E1 ; : : :; En)
                                    f   g

3 Since we assume that all variable names are distinct and disallow lexically nested
    predicate abstractions, we can safely use the dynamic environment at the call site
    instead of preserving the static environment at the predicate abstraction's de nition
    point.

                                            195
                                       htrue; K i ) htrue; K i
                            lookup(v; K ) =              instanceof( ; c) = b
                                           hv   @ c; K i ) hb; K i
                               lookup(v; K ) =              accept( ) = b
                                       h   test v; K i ) hb; K i
                               eval(E; K ) =                K [v := ] = K 0
                                      hlet v := E; K i ) htrue; K 0i
                                  8i 2 f1; : : : ; ng lookup(vi ; K ) = i
 lookup(p; K ) = predicate p(v10 ; : : : ; vn0 ) when P return ff1 := w10 , : : : , fm := wm0 , : : : g
                            hP;K [v10 := 1 ; : : : ; vn0 := n ]i ) hfalse; K 0 i
               hp(v1 , : : : , vn ) => ff1 = w1 , : : : , fm = wmg; K i ) hfalse; K i
                                  8i 2 f1; : : : ; ng lookup(vi ; K ) = i
 lookup(p; K ) = predicate p(v10 ; : : : ; vn0 ) when P return ff1 := w10 , : : : , fm := wm0 , : : : g
                            hP; K [v10 := 1 ; : : : ; vn0 := n ] i ) htrue; K 0i
                                8i 2 f1; : : : ; mg lookup(wi0 ; K 0) = i
                                   K [w1 := 1 ; : : : ; wm := m ] = K 00             ()
               hp(v1 , : : : , vn ) => ff1 = w1 , : : : , fm = wm g; K i ) htrue; K 00i
                                              hP;K i ) hb; K 0 i
                                          hnot P; K i ) h:b; K i
                                           hP;K i ) hfalse; K 0 i
                                       hP and Q; K i ) hfalse; K i
                          hP;K i ) htrue; K 0 i            hQ; K 0i ) hfalse; K 00 i
                                       hP and Q; K i ) hfalse; K i
                           hP; K i ) htrue; K 0i           hQ; K 0 i ) htrue; K 00i
                                       hP and Q; K i ) htrue; K 00 i
                                           hP; K i ) htrue; K 0i
                                         hP or Q; K i ) htrue; K i
                           hP; K i ) hfalse; K 0 i          hQ; K i ) htrue; K 00i
                                         hP or Q; K i ) htrue; K i
                           hP;K i ) hfalse; K 0i            hQ; K i ) hfalse; K 00 i
                                        hP or Q; K i ) hfalse; K i


Fig.4. Dynamic semantics evaluation
                            0
                                    rules. Domains and helper functions appear in
Fig. 3. We say hP;K i ) hb; K i when the predicate P evaluates in the environment
K to the boolean result b, producing the new environment K 0. If the result b is false,
then the resulting environment K 0 is ignored. Bindings do not escape from not or or
constructs; App. B relaxes the latter restriction. The starred hypothesis uses K , not
K 0, to construct the result environment K 00 because only the bindings speci ed in the
return clause, not all bindings in the predicate's when clause, are exposed at the call
site.
                                                   196
is then the result of evaluating Body i0 in the environment Ki0 , so that variables
bound in the predicate can be referred to in the body. If no such i0 exists, then
an exception is raised: a \message not understood" error if I is empty, or a
\message ambiguous" error if there is no unique most speci c element of I.
    An implementation can make a number of improvements to this base algo-
rithm. Here we brie y mention just a few such optimizations. First, common
subexpression elimination over predicate expressions can limit the computation
done in evaluating guards. Second, precomputed implication relationships can
prevent the necessity for evaluating every predicate expression. If a more spe-
ci c one is true, then the less speci c one is certain to be satis ed; however, such
satisfaction is irrelevant since the more speci c predicate will be chosen. Third,
clauses and methods can be reordered to succeed or fail more quickly, as in some
Prolog implementations [Zel93].

3.2 Static semantics and typechecking
The operational model of predicate dispatch described in Sect. 3.1 can raise
a run-time exception at a message send if no method is applicable or if no
applicable method overrides all the others. We extend the typechecking rules of
the underlying language to guarantee that no such exception occurs.
    Figure 5 presents the static semantic domains, helper functions, and type-
checking rules for the core predicate dispatching sublanguage. The return type
for a predicate invocation is an unordered record. Bindings do not escape from
not or or constructs (App. B makes bindings on both sides of a or disjunct
visible outside the disjunct).
    We can separate typechecking into two parts: client-side, which handles
all checking of expressions in the underlying language and uses method sig-
natures to typecheck message sends, and implementation-side, which checks
method and predicate implementations against their corresponding signatures.
Only implementation-side checking is a ected by predicate dispatching.
    Implementation-side typechecking must guarantee completeness and unique-
ness. Completeness guarantees that no \message not understood" error is raised:
for every possible set of arguments at each call site, some method is applicable.
Let Pm be the disjunction of the predicates of all of m's implementations, and
let Ps be a predicate expressing the set of argument classes that conform to the
types in the method signature. (See below for the details of predicate Ps; a class
c conforms to a type T if every object which is an instance of that class has type
T or a subtype of T .) If Ps implies Pm , then some method is always applicable.
Uniqueness guarantees that no \message ambiguous" error is raised: for no pos-
sible set of arguments at any call site are there multiple most-speci c methods.
Uniqueness is guaranteed if, for each pair of predicates P and Q attached to two
di erent implementations, either P and Q are disjoint (so their associated meth-
ods can never be simultaneously applicable) or one of the predicates implies the
other (so one of the methods overrides the other). Section 4 presents implication
and disjointness tests over predicate expressions.

                                        197
T  T0                Type T is a subtype of T 0 .
conformant-type(T; c) Return the most-speci c (with respect to the subtyping partial
                      order) type T 0 such that every subclass c0 of c that conforms
                      to T also conforms to T 0 . This helper function is supplied by
                      the underlying programming language.
  + 0 = 00            Overriding extension of typing environments. For each v 2
                      dom( 0 ), if 0 j= v : T 0 , then 00 j= v : T 0 ; for each
                      v 2 dom( ) n dom( 0 ), if j= v : T , then 00 j= v : T .

             `   signature m(T1 , : : : , Tn ) : Tr ) + fm : (T1 ; : : : ; Tn ) ! Tr g
                                       j= m : (T1 ; : : : ; Tn ) ! Tr
            + fv1 : T1 ; : : : ; vn : Tn g ` P ) 0               0 j= Body : Tb             Tb  Tr
                     ` method m(v1 , : : : , vn ) when P Body )


           h ; predsignature p(T1 , : : : , Tn ) return ff1 : T1r , : : : , fm : Tmr gi
              )                                    r            r
                     + fp : (T1 ; : : : ; Tn ) ! ff1 : T1 ; : : : ; fm : Tm g g
                        j= p : (T1 ; : : : ; Tn ) ! ff1 : T1r ; : : : ; fm : Tmr ; : : :g
                                + fv1 : T1 ; : : : ; vn : Tn g ` P )         0
                          8i 2 f1; : : : ; mg      0 j= vi0 : Ti0 ^ Ti0  Tir
     `   predicate p(v1 , : : : , vn ) when P return ff1 := v10 , : : : , fm := vm0 g )
                                                `      true )
                             j= v : T       conformant-type(c; T ) = T 0
                                        ` v @ c ) + fv : T 0 g
                                              j= v : Bool
                                              `    test v )
                                                  j= expr : T
                                   `   let v := expr ) + fv : T g
                     j= p : (T1 ; : : : ; Tn ) ! ff1 : T1r ; : : : ; fm : Tm
                                                                           r ; : : :g
                        0
               j= v1 : T1 : : :                    0
                                          j= vn : Tn      T1  T1 : : : Tn0  Tn
                                                            0
           ( , , ) =>
      ` p v1 : : : vn        ff1 v1 : : : fm vm g ) + fv10 : T1r ; : : : ; vm
                                          0
                                       = , ,            0 =                           0 : Tr g
                                                                                           m
                                                   `P )         0
                                               `    not P )
                                    ` P1 )         00 ` P2 ) 00
                                         ` P1and P2 ) 00
                                    ` P1 ) 0          ` P2 ) 00
                                          ` P1 or P2 )

Fig.5. Typechecking rules. The hypothesis j= E : T indicates that typechecking
in typing environment assigns type T to expression E . The judgment ` P )
  0 represents extension of typechecking environments: given type environment , P
typechecks and produces new typechecking environment 0 .
                                                       198
    Completeness checking requires a predicate Ps that expresses the set of tuples
of values v1; : : :; vn conforming to some signature's argument types T1 ; : : :; Tn;
this predicate depends on the host language's model of classes and typing. If
classes and types are the same, and all classes are concrete, then the corre-
sponding predicate is simply v1 @ T1 and : : : and vn @ Tn . If abstract classes are
allowed, then each vi @ Ti is replaced with vi @ Ti1 or : : : or vi @ Tim , where
the Tij are the top concrete subclasses of Ti . If inheritance and subtyping are
separate notions, then the predicates become more complex.
    Our typechecking need not test that methods conform to signatures, unlike
previous work on typechecking multimethods [CL95]. In predicate dispatching,
a method's formal argument has two distinct types: the \external" type derived
from the signature declaration, and the possibly ner \internal" type guaranteed
by successful evaluation of the method's predicate. The individual @ tests narrow
the type of the tested value to the most-speci c type to which all classes passing
the test conform, in a host-language-speci c manner, using conformant-type.
The conformant-type function replaces the more complicated conformance test
of earlier work.

4 Comparing predicate expressions
The static and dynamic semantics of predicate dispatching require compile-time
tests of implication between predicates to determine the method overriding re-
lationship. The static semantics also requires tests of completeness and unique-
ness to ensure the absence of \message not understood" errors and \message
ambiguous" errors, respectively. All of these tests reduce to tautology tests over
predicates. Method m1 with predicate p1 overrides method m2 with predicate p2
i p1 implies p2 |that is, if (not p1) or p2 is true. A set of methods is complete
if the disjunction of their predicates is true. Uniqueness for a set of methods re-
quires that for any pair of methods, either one's predicate overrides the other's,
or the two predicates are logically exclusive. Two formulas are mutually exclusive
exactly if one implies the negation of the other.
    Section 4.1 presents a tautology test over predicate expressions which is sim-
ple, sound, and complete up to equivalence of arbitrary program expressions
in test constructs, which we treat as black boxes. Because determining logi-
cal tautology is NP-complete, in the worst case an algorithm takes exponential
time in the size of the predicate expressions. For object-oriented dispatch, this
is the number of arguments to a method (a small constant). Simple optimiza-
tions (Sect. 4.2) make the tests fast in many practical situations. This cost is
incurred only at compile time; at run time, precomputed overriding relations
among methods are simply looked up.
    We treat expressions from the underlying programming language as black
boxes (but do identify those whose canonicalizations are structurally identical).
Tests involving the run-time values of arbitrary host language expressions are
undecidable. The algorithm presented here also does not address recursive pred-

                                        199
icates. While we have a set of heuristics that succeed in many common, practical
cases, we do not yet have a complete, sound, and ecient algorithm.
4.1 The base algorithm
The base algorithm for testing predicate tautology has three components. First,
the predicate expression is canonicalized to macro-expand predicate abstrac-
tions, eliminate variable bindings, and use canonical names for formal arguments.
This transformation prevents di erent names for the same value from being con-
sidered distinct. Second, implication relations are computed among the atomic
predicates (for instance, x @ int implies x @ num). Finally, the canonicalized
predicate is tested for every assignment of atomic predicates to truth values
which is consistent with the atomic predicate implications. The predicate is a
tautology i evaluating it in every consistent truth assignment yields true.
Canonicalization Canonicalization performs the following transformations:
 { Expand predicate calls inline, replacing the => clause by a series of let
   bindings.
 { Replace let-bound variables by the expressions to which they are bound,
   and replace let expressions by true.
 { Canonically rename formal parameters according to their position in the
     formal list.
    After canonicalization, each predicate expression is a logical formula over the
following atoms with connectives and, or, and not.
     pred-atom ::= true
                  j test expr
                  j expr @ class-id
Canonicalized predicates are a compile-time construct used only for predicate
comparison; they are never executed. Canonicalized predicates bind no variables,
and they use only global variables and formal parameters.
    In the worst case, canonicalization exponentially blows up expression sizes.
For instance, in
let x1 = x+x andlet x2 = x1+x1 andlet x3 = x2+x2 and : : : andtest xn = y ;
the nal xn is replaced by an expression containing 2n instances of x. Inline
expansion of predicate abstractions similarly contributes to this blowup. As with
ML typechecking [KM89], which is exponential in the worst case but linear in
practice, we anticipate that predicates leading to exponential behavior will be
rare.
    In what follows, we consider two expressions identical if, after canonicaliza-
tion, they have the same abstract syntax tree.
    Omitting the canonicalization step prevents some equivalent expressions from
being recognized as such, but does not prevent the remainder of the algorithm
from succeeding when results are named and reused rather than the computation
repeated.

                                       200
Truth assignment checking We present a simple exponential-time algorithm
to check logical tautology; because the problem is NP-complete, any algorithm
takes exponential time in the worst case. Let there be n distinct predicate atoms
in the predicate; there are 2n di erent truth assignments for those atoms. Not
all of those truth assignments are consistent with the implications over predicate
atoms: for instance, it is not sensible to set a @ int to true but a @ num to
false, because a @ int implies a @ num. If every consistent truth assignment
satis es the predicate, then the predicate is a tautology. Each check of a single
truth assignment takes time linear in the size of the predicate expression, for a
total time of O(n2n).
    The following rules specify implication over (possibly negated) canonical
predicate atoms.
           E1 @ c1 E2 @ c2 i (E1 E2 ) and (c1 is a subclass of c2 )
                   )                      

     E1 @ c1 not(E2 @ c2) i (E1 E2 ) and (c1 is disjoint from c2 )
             )                            

                       a1 a2 i not a2 not a1
                        )                     )

                   a1 not a2 i a2 not a1
                    )                    )


Two classes are disjoint if they have no common descendant, and notnot a = a.
4.2 Optimizations
The worst-case exponential-time cost to check predicate tautology need not pre-
vent its use in practice. Satis ability is checked only at compile time. When
computing overriding relationships, the predicates tend to be small (linear in
the number of arguments to a method). We present heuristics that reduce the
costs even further.
    Logical simpli cation| such as eliminating uses of true, false, a andnot a,
and a or not a, and replacing notnot a by a| can be performed as part of
canonicalization to reduce the size of predicate expressions.
    Unrelated atomic predicates can be treated separately. To determine whether
method m1 (f1 @c1; f2@c2 ) ::: overrides method m1 (f1 @c3; f2@c4 ) ::: it is
                            f   g                                       f   g

sucient to independently determine the relationship between c1 and c3 and
that between c2 and c4. Two tests with a smaller exponent replace one with a
larger one, substantially reducing the overall cost. This technique always solves
ordinary single and multiple dispatching overriding in time constant and linear
in the number of formals, respectively, by examining each formal position inde-
pendently. The technique also applies to more complicated cases, by examining
subsets of formal parameters which appear together in tests from the underlying
programming language.
    It is not always necessary to completely expand predicate abstraction calls
as part of canonicalization. If relations between predicate abstractions or other
predicate expressions are known, then the tautology test can use them directly.
As one example, di erent cases of a classi er are mutually exclusive by de nition.
    The side conditions on atomic predicate values (their implication relation-
ships) usually prevent the need to check all 2n di erent truth assignments for

                                       201
a predicate containing n atomic predicates. When a @ int is set to true, then
all truth assignments which set a @ num to false can be skipped without further
consideration.
    Finally, it may be possible to achieve faster results in some cases by recasting
the tautology test. Rather than attempting to prove that every truth assignment
satis es a predicate expression, it may be advantageous to search for a single
truth assignment that satis es its negation.

5 Related work
5.1 Object-oriented approaches
In the model of predicate dispatching, traditional object-oriented dispatching
translates to either a single class test on the receiver argument or, for multi-
ple dispatching, a conjunction of class tests over several arguments. Full predi-
cate dispatching additionally enables testing arbitrary boolean expressions from
the underlying language, accessing and naming subcomponents of the argu-
ments, performing tests over multiple arguments, and arbitrarily combining
tests via conjunction, disjunction, and negation. Also, named predicate ab-
stractions e ectively introduce new virtual classes and corresponding subclass-
ing links into the program inheritance hierarchy. Predicate dispatching pre-
serves the ability in object-oriented languages to statically determine when
one method overrides another and when no message lookup error can occur.
Singly-dispatched object-oriented languages have ecient method lookup algo-
rithms and separate typechecking, which depend crucially on the absence of
any separate modules that dispatch on other argument positions. Multiply-
dispatched object-oriented languages have more challenging problems in imple-
mentation [KR89,CTK94,AGS94] and typechecking [CL95], and predicate dis-
patching in its unrestricted form shares these challenges.
    Predicate classes [Cha93b] are an earlier extension of object-oriented dis-
patching to include arbitrary boolean predicates. A predicate class which in-
herits from class A and has an associated predicate expression guard would be
modeled as a named predicate abstraction that tests @A and guard . Predicate
dispatching is more general, for example by being able to de ne predicates over
multiple arguments. Predicate dispatching exploits the structure of and, or, and
not to automatically determine when no message lookup error can occur, while
typechecking of predicate classes relies on uncheckable user assertions about the
relations between the predicate classes' guard expressions.
    Classi ers in Kea [HHM90b,HHM90a,MHH91] let an instance of a class be
dynamically reclassi ed as being of a subclass. A classi er for a class is com-
posed of a sequence of predicate/subclass pairs, with an object of the input class
automatically classi ed as being of the subclass with the rst successful predi-
cate. Because the sequence of predicates is totally ordered and the rst successful
predicate takes precedence over all later predicates, a classi er provides a concise
syntax for a set of mutually exclusive, exhaustive predicate abstractions. Predi-
cate abstractions are more general than classi ers in many of the ways discussed

                                        202
above, but they also provide syntactic support for this important idiom. Kea is a
purely functional language, so classi ers do not need to consider the semantics of
reclassifying objects when the values of predicates change; predicate dispatching
addresses this issue by (conceptually) performing reclassi cation as needed as
part of message dispatching.
    Modes [Tai93] are another mechanism for adding dynamic reclassi cation of a
class into a subclass. Unlike predicate classes and classi ers, the modes of a class
are not rst-class subclasses but rather internal components of a class that cannot
be extended externally and that cannot exploit inheritance to factor shared code.
Mode reselection can be done either explicitly at the end of each method or
implicitly after each assignment using a declaratively speci ed classi cation.

5.2 Pattern matching approaches
Predicate dispatching supports many of the facilities found in pattern matching
as in ML [MTH90] and Haskell [HJW+ 92], including tests over arbitrary nested
structure, binding of names to subcomponents, and arbitrary boolean guard ex-
pressions. Predicate dispatching additionally supports inheritance (its class tests
are more general than datatype constructor patterns), disjunctions and negations
of tests and conjunctions of tests on the same object, and named predicate ab-
stractions to factor out common patterns of tests and to o er conditional views
of objects extended with virtual elds. The patterns in a function are totally
ordered, while predicate dispatching computes a partial order over predicates
and warns when two patterns might be ambiguous. Finally, new methods can be
added to existing generic functions without changing any existing code, while
new patterns can be added to a function only by modifying it.
    Views [Wad87] extend pattern matching to abstract data types by allowing
an abstract data type to o er a number of views of itself as a concrete datatype,
over which pattern matching is de ned. Predicate dispatching supports \pattern
matching" over the results of methods (by let-binding their results to names and
then testing those names, just as eld contents are bound and tested), and those
methods can serve as accessor functions to a virtual view of the object, for
instance rho and theta methods presenting a polar view of a cartesian point.
Views must be isomorphisms, which enables equational reasoning over them; by
contrast, named predicate abstractions provide conditional views of an object
without requiring the presence of both in and out views.
    Pizza [OW97] supports both algebraic datatypes (and associated pattern
matching) and object-oriented dispatching, but the two mechanisms are largely
distinct. The authors argue that datatypes are good for xed numbers of rep-
resentations with extensible operations, while classes are good for a xed set of
operations with extensible representations. By integrating pattern matching and
dispatching, including multimethods, predicate dispatching achieves extensibility
in both dimensions along with the syntactic convenience of pattern matching.
Predicate dispatching faces more dicult implementation and separate type-
checking challenges with the shift to multimethod-like dispatching.

                                        203
6 Conclusions
Many language features express the concept of selecting a most-speci c applica-
ble method from a collection of candidates, including object-oriented dispatch,
pattern matching, views, predicate classes, and classi ers. Predicate dispatching
integrates and generalizes these mechanisms in a single framework, based on a
core language of boolean expressions over class tests and arbitrary expressions,
explicit binding forms to generalize features of pattern matching, and named
predicate abstractions with result bindings. By providing a single integrated
mechanism, programs can take advantage of various styles of dispatch and even
combine them to create applicability conditions that were previously either im-
possible or inconvenient to express.
    We have implemented predicate dispatching in the context of Dubious, a
simple core multiply-dispatched object-oriented programming language. The
implementation supports all the examples presented in this paper, although
for clarity this paper uses a slightly di erent presentation syntax. The imple-
mentation supports the full core language of Sect. 3 and many of the syn-
tactic sugars of App. A. This implementation was helpful in verifying our
base design. We expect that it will also provide insight into the advantages
and disadvantages of programming with predicate dispatching, as well as help
us to evaluate optimization strategies. The implementation is available from
http://www.cs.washington.edu/research/projects/cecil/www/Gud/.
    So far, we have focused on developing the static and dynamic semantics for
predicate dispatching. Two unresolved practical issues that we will address in
the future are ecient implementation techniques and separate typechecking
support for predicate dispatching. We anticipate that ecient implementations
of unrestricted predicate dispatching will build upon work on ecient implemen-
tation of multimethod dispatching and on predicate classes. In addition, static
analyses that factor a collection of predicates to avoid redundant tests and side-
e ect analyses that determine when predicates need not be re-evaluated appear
to be promising lines for future research. Similarly, separate typechecking of col-
lections of predicated methods will build upon current work to develop modular
and incremental methods for typechecking multimethods [CL95].

Acknowledgments
Todd Millstein, Vassily Litvinov, Wilson Hsieh, David Grove, and the anonymous
referees made helpful comments on a draft of this paper. This research is sup-
ported in part by an NSF grant (number CCR-9503741), an NSF Young Investi-
gator Award (number CCR-9457767), a grant from the Oce of Naval Research
(contract number N00014-94-1-1136), an IBM graduate fellowship, an FCAR
graduate scholarship, and gifts from Sun Microsystems, IBM, Xerox PARC, Pure
Software, and Edison Design Group.

                                       204
References
[AGS94] Eric Amiel, Olivier Gruber, and Eric Simon. Optimizing multi-method dis-
         patch using compressed dispatch tables. In Proceedings OOPSLA '94, pages
         244{258, Portland, OR, October 1994.
[BKK+86] Daniel G. Bobrow, Ken Kahn, Gregor Kiczales, Larry Masinter, Mark Ste-
           k, and Frank Zdybel. Commonloops: Merging lisp and object-oriented
         programming. In Proceedings OOPSLA '86, pages 17{29, November 1986.
         Published as ACM SIGPLAN Notices, volume 21, number 11.
[Cha92] Craig Chambers. Object-oriented multi-methods in Cecil. In O. Lehrmann
         Madsen, editor, Proceedings ECOOP '92, LNCS 615, pages 33{56, Utrecht,
         The Netherlands, June 1992. Springer-Verlag.
[Cha93a] Craig Chambers. The Cecil language: Speci cation and rationale. Technical
         Report UW-CSE-93-03-05, Department of Computer Science and Engineer-
         ing. University of Washington, March 1993.
[Cha93b] Craig Chambers. Predicate classes. In O. Nierstrasz, editor, Proceedings
         ECOOP '93, LNCS 707, pages 268{296, Kaiserslautern, Germany, July
         1993. Springer-Verlag.
[CL95] Craig Chambers and Gary T. Leavens. Typechecking and modules for
         multi-methods. ACM Transactions on Programming Languages and Sys-
          tems, 17(6):805{843, November 1995.
[CTK94] Weimin Chen, Volker Turau, and Wolfgang Klas. Ecient dynamic look-
         up strategy for multi-methods. In M. Tokoro and R. Pareschi, editors,
         Proceedings ECOOP '94, LNCS 821, pages 408{431, Bologna, Italy, July
         1994. Springer-Verlag.
[HHM90a] J. Hamer, J.G. Hosking, and W.B. Mugridge. A method for integrating clas-
         si cation within an object-oriented environment. Technical Report Auck-
         land Computer Science Report No. 48, Department of Computer Science,
         University of Auckland, October 1990.
[HHM90b] J.G. Hosking, J. Hamer, and W.B. Mugridge. Integrating functional and
          object-oriented programming. In Technology of Object-Oriented Languages
          and Systems TOOLS 3, pages 345{355, Sydney, 1990.
[HJW+ 92] Paul Hudak, Simon Peyton Jones, Philip Wadler, Brian Boutel, Jon
          Fairbairn, Joseph Fasel, Maria Guzman, Kevin Hammond, John Hughes,
         Thomas Johnsson, Dick Kieburtz, Rishiyur Nikhil, Will Partain, and John
         Peterson. Report on the programming language Haskell, version 1.2. SIG-
          PLAN Notices, 27(5), May 1992.
[KM89] Paris C. Kanellakis and John C. Mitchell. Polymorphic uni cation and ML
          typing. In ACM-SIGPLAN ACM-SIGACT, editor, Conference Record of
          the 16th Annual ACM Symposium on Principles of Programming Languages
          (POPL '89), pages 105{115, Austin, TX, USA, January 1989. ACM Press.
[KR89] Gregor Kiczales and Luis Rodriguez. Ecient method dispatch in PCL.
          Technical Report SSL 89-95, Xerox PARC Systems Sciences Laboratory,
          1989.
[MHH91] Warwick B. Mugridge, John Hamer, and John G. Hosking. Multi-methods in
          a statically-typed programming language. In P. America, editor, Proceedings
          ECOOP '91, LNCS 512, pages 307{324, Geneva, Switzerland, July 15-19
          1991. Springer-Verlag.
[MTH90] Robin Milner, Mads Tofte, and Robert Harper. The De nition of Standard
          ML. MIT Press, 1990.

                                        205
[OW97]  Martin Odersky and Philip Wadler. Pizza into Java: Translating theory into
        practice. In Conference Record of the 24th ACM SIGPLAN-SIGACT Sym-
        posium on Principles of Programming Languages, pages 146{159, January
        1997.
[Ste90] Guy L. Steele Jr. Common Lisp: The Language. Digital Press, Bedford,
        MA, 1990. Second edition.
[Tai93] Antero Taivalsaari. Object-oriented programming with modes. Journal of
        Object-Oriented Programming, pages 25{32, June 1993.
[Wad87] Philip Wadler. Views: A way for pattern matching to cohabit with data
        abstraction. In Proceedings of the Fourteenth Annual ACM Symposium on
        Principles of Programming Languages, pages 307{313, Munich, Germany,
        January 1987.
[Zel93] John M. Zelle. Learning search-control heuristics for logic programs: Ap-
        plications tospeed-up learning and languageacquisitions. Technical Report
        AI93-200, University of Texas, Austin, May 1, 1993.

A Desugaring rules
The following rewrite rules desugar the high-level syntax of Fig. 6 into the core
abstract syntax of Fig. 2. The rules are grouped by their intention, such as
providing names for arbitrary expressions or breaking down compound predicate
abstractions.
    For brevity, we omit the rewrite rules which introduce defaults for omitted
optional program fragments: dummy variables for pattern variables, \@Any" spe-
cializers, empty eld pattern sets in specializers, and \when true" and \return
f g" clauses. Additional rules may be introduced to simplify the resulting for-
mula, such as converting \v @ Any" to \true" and performing logical simpli ca-
tion.                    V
    For brevity, we use ni=1 Pi Vnto stand for the conjunction of the terms:
                                f   g

P1 and : : : and Pn. When n = 0, i=1 Pi stands for true. Variables v0 and vi0
                                         f     g

are new variables which do not appear elsewhere in the program. Ceiling braces
de surround (potentially) sugared expressions; application of the rewrite rules
eliminates those braces.

A.1 Declarations
These rules move specializers from formal lists into when clauses.
 dmethod m(v1 @ S1 , : : : , vn @ Sn ) when P Body e
                                           V
    =) method m(v1 , : : : , vn) when ni=1 fdvi @ Si eg and dP e Body
 dpredicate p(v1 @ S1 , : : : , vn @ Sn ) when P return ff1 := E1 , : : : , fm := Em ge
    =) predicate p(v1 , : : : , vn )
           when Vni=1 fdvi @ Si eg and dP e dreturn ff1 := E1 , : : : , fm := Em ge


                                         206
method-sig       ::= signature method-id ( h type i ) : type
method-decl      ::= method method-id ( h formal-pattern i )
                        [ when pred-expr ] method-body
pred-sig         ::= predsignature pred-id ( h type i )
                        [ return f h eld-id : type i g ]
pred-decl        ::= predicate pred-id ( h formal-pattern i ) [ when pred-expr ]
                        [ return f h eld-id := expr i g ]
classi er-decl ::= classify ( h formal-pattern i )
                        h as pred-id when pred-expr [ return f h eld-id := expr i g ] i
                        [ as pred-id otherwise [ return f h eld-id := expr i g ] ]
P; Q 2 pred-expr ::= expr @ specializer           succeeds if expr evaluates to a value
                                                     that satis es specializer
                   j test expr                    succeeds if expr evaluates to true
                   j let var-id := expr           evaluate expr and bind var-id
                                                     to its value; always succeeds
                   j pred-id ( h expr i ) [ => f h eld-pat i g ]
                                                  test predicate abstraction
                   j true                         always succeeds
                   j false                        never succeeds
                   j not pred-expr                negation
                   j pred-expr and pred-expr      conjunction (short-circuited)
                   j pred-expr or pred-expr       disjunction (short-circuited)
formal-pattern ::= [ var-id ] [ @ specializer ] like var-id @ specializer in pred-expr
F 2 eld-pat      ::= eld-id [ = var-id ] [ @ specializer ]
S 2 specializer ::= class-spec [ f h eld-pat i g ]
C 2 class-spec ::= class-id                       expr @ class-id is a class test
                   j pred-id                      expr @ pred-id [ f : : : g ] is sugar
                                                     for pred-id(expr) [ =>f : : : g ]
                   j not class-spec               succeeds if class-spec does not
                   j class-spec & class-spec      succeeds if both class-specs do
                   j class-spec j class-spec      succeeds if either class-spec does

Fig.6. Full extended abstract syntax for predicate dispatching. The syntax is as pre-
sented incrementally in Sect. 2, with the addition of the true and false predicate
expressions and the not, &, and j class specializers. Words and symbols in boldface
represent terminals. Angle brackets denote zero or more comma-separated repetitions
of an item. Square brackets contain optional expressions. Each predicate may be de ned
only once (App. B relaxes this restriction), and recursive predicates are forbidden.

A.2 Naming of non-variable expressions
The core language permits arbitrary expressions only in let bindings and uses
variable references elsewhere. These rules introduce let bindings and are intended
to re only once (alternately, only if one of the E expressions is not a mere
variable reference), lest the @ and predicate application rules cause an in nite
loop in desugaring.
                                          
      dE @ S e =) let v0 := E and v0 @ S


                                         207
     d test E e =) let v0 := E and test v0
      dp(E1 , : : : , En ) => fF1 , : : : , Fm ge
                         V
                   =) ni=1 flet vi0 := Ei g and dp(v10 , : : : , vn0 ) => fF1 , : : : , Fm ge
      dreturn ff1 := E1 , : : : , fm := Em ge
                            V
                   =) and m                 0                          0
                              i=1 flet vi := Ei g return ff1 := v1 , : : : , fm := vm g
                                                                                        0


A.3 Compound predicate expressions
These rules show how to desugar false and compound predicate expressions.
                                     falsee =) not true
                                     d
                                   dnot P e =) not dP e
                               dP1 and P2 e =) dP1 e and dP2 e
                                 dP1 or P2 e =) dP1 e or dP2 e

A.4 Field bindings
Pattern matching permits arbitrarily nested tests and simultaneous matching
on elds of objects, elds of predicate results, and results of arbitrary method
invocations. These rules separate these varieties of record patterns and atten
tests.
    We introduce the concept of a class specializer generating a eld. A class
name generates the elds in the class; a predicate name generates the elds in
the predicate's return clause; a conjunction generates the elds generated by
either of its conjuncts; and a disjunction generates the elds generated by both
of its disjuncts.
    If Fi is generated by C 6= c for 1  i  m < n:
            dv @ C fF1 , : : : , Fm , : : : , Fn ge
               =) dv @ C fF1 , : : : , Fm ge and dv @ Any fFm+1 , : : : , Fn ge
           dv @ c ff1 = v1 @ V
                             S1 , : : : , fn = vn @ Sn ge
              =) v @ c and ni=1 flet vi := v:fi and dvi @ Si eg
           dv @ p ff1 = v1 @ S1 , : : : , fn = vn @ Sn ge
                                                          V
              =) p(v) => ff1 = v1 , : : : , fn = vn g and ni=1 fdv0 @ Si eg

A.5 Compound predicate abstractions
These rules simplify compound predicate abstractions.
                 dv @ not CfF1 , : : : , Fm ge =) not dv @ CfF1 , : : : , Fm ge
   If Fi , m + 1  i  n, is generated by C2 (& rule only):
      dv @ C1 & C2 fF1 , : : : , Fm , : : : , Fn ge =) dv @ C1 fF1 , : : : , Fm ge
                                                          and dv @ C2 fFm+1 , : : : , Fn ge
               dv @ C1 j C2 fF1 , : : : , Fm ge =) dv @ C1 fF1 , : : : , Fm ge
                                                          or dv @ C2 fF1 , : : : , Fm ge

                                               208
A.6 Classi ers
Sequential ordering over classi er cases is enforced by creating extra predicates
di such that di is true if any cj , j i, is true. Each ci is true only if di 1 is not
                                            
(that is, no previous conjunct was true).
 2                                                                                                3
   classify(v1 @ S1 , : : : , vm @ Sm )
 6 as c1 when P1 return ff1;1 := v10 ;1 , : : : , f1;m1 := v10 ;m1 g                          7
 6   ..                                                                                       7
 6                                                                                            7
 6    .                                                                                       7
 6
 6  as cn when Pn return ffn;1 := vn;0 1 , : :0 : , fn;mn := vn;m 0 g
                                                                      n
                                                                                              7
                                                                                              7
 6  as cn+1 otherwise return ffn+1;1 := vn+1;1 , : : : , fn+1;mn+1 := vn0 +1;mn+1            g7
                                                               
  =) predicate   c1 (v1 @ S1 , : : : , vm @ Sm ) when P1
           return ff1;1 := v10 ;1 , : : : , f1;m1 := v10 ;m1 g;
     dpredicate d1 (v1 @ S1 , : : : , vm @ Sm ) when P1 ;e
                                                                                           
       predicate c2 (v1 @ S1 ,0: : : , vm @ Sm ) when       P2 and not d1 (v1, : : : , vm )
           return ff2;1 := v2;1 , : : : , f2;m2 := v20 ;m2 g;
     dpredicate d2 (v1 @ S1 , : : : , vm @ Sm ) when d1 (v1 , : : : , vm ) or P2 ;e
          ..
           .                                                                                     
            predicate cn (v1 @ S1 ,0: : : , vm @ Sm ) when
                                                         0 g;
                                                             Pn and not dn 1 (v1 , : : : , vm )
                return ffn;1 := vn;1 , : : : , fn;mn := vn;mn
          dpredicate dn (v1 @ S1 , : : : , vm @ Sm ) when dn 1 (v1 , : : : , vm ) or Pn ;e
                                                                                       
            predicate cn+1 (v1 @ S1 ,0: : : , vm @ Sm ) when not0 dn (v1 , : : : , vm )
                return ffn+1;1 := vn+1;1 , : : : , fn+1;mn+1 := vn+1;mn+1 g;


B Bindings escaping \or"
In the static and dynamic semantics presented in Sect. 3, bindings never escape
from or predicate expressions. Relaxing this constraint provides extra conve-
nience to the programmer and permits more values to be reused rather than
recomputed. It is also equivalent to permitting overloaded predicates or mul-
tiple predicate de nitions |so far we have permitted only a single de nition
of each predicate. With appropriate variable renaming, multiple predicate def-
initions that rely on a dispatching-like mechanism to select the most speci c
applicable method can be converted into uses of or, and vice versa.
    For example, the two ConstantFold methods of Sect. 2.3 can be combined
into a single method. Eliminating code duplication is a prime goal of object-
oriented programming, but the previous version repeated the body twice. Use of
a helper method would unnecessarily separate the dispatching conditions from
the code being executed, though a helper predicate could reduce code duplication
in the predicate expression.

                                                209
  -- handle case of adding zero to a non-constant
  method ConstantFold(e@BinopExpr{ op@IntPlus, arg1=a1, arg2=a2 })
    when (a1@IntConst{ value=v } and test(v == 0)
           and not(a2@IntConst) and let res := a2)
      or (a2@IntConst{ value=v } and test(v == 0)
           and not(a1@IntConst) and let res := a1) {
    ... -- increment counter, or do other common work here
    return res; }

    As another example, the LoopExit example of Sect. 2.4 can be extended
to present a view which indicates which branch of the CFG_2succ is the loop
exit and which the backward branch. When performing iterative data ow, this
is the only information of interest, and in our current implementation (which
uses predicate classes [Cha93b]) we generally recompute this information after
discovering that an object is a LoopExit. Presenting a view which includes this
information directly would improve the code's readability and eciency.
 predsignature LoopExit(CFGnode)
   return { loop:CFGloop, next_loop:CFGedge, next_exit:CFGedge };
 predicate LoopExit(n@CFG_2succ{ next_true: t, next_false: f })
   when (test(t.is_loop_exit) and let nl := t and let ne := f)
     or (test(f.is_loop_exit) and let nl := f and let ne := t)
   return { loop := nl.containing_loop, next_loop := nl, next_exit := ne };

   Permitting bindings which appear on both sides of or to escape requires
the following changes to the dynamic semantics of Fig. 4. (The third rule is
unchanged from Fig. 4 but included here for completeness.)
                                 P; K
                                   h   i ) htrue; K 0     i

                              P or Q; K
                               h               true; K 0
                                           i ) h              i


                  hP; K i ) h false; K 0
                                       i      Q; K
                                                 h         true; K 00
                                                         i ) h    i

                             P or Q; K
                               h               true; K
                                           i ) h
                                                        00    i


                 h P; Ki ) h false; K 0i      Q; K
                                                 h         false; K 00
                                                         i ) h    i

                              P or Q; K
                               h           i ) hfalse; K      i


These execution rules do not re ect that only the bindings appearing on both
sides, not all those appearing on the succeeding side, should escape; however,
the typechecking rules below guarantee that only the appropriate variables are
referenced.
    The static semantics of Fig. 5 are modi ed to add two helper functions and
replace a typechecking rule:
     T T 0 = T 00
        t               Least upper bound over types. T 00 is the least common
                        supertype of T and T 0 .
    t
               0
      env ( ; ) =    00 Pointwise lub over typing environments. For each v
                                                                         2

                        dom( 00) = dom( ) dom( 0), if = v : T and
                                                     \            j
                          0 = v : T 0, then 00 = v : T T 0 .
                           j                         j        t




                                           210
                 `   P1   )
                              0      `    P2 )
                                                 00       tenv (
                                                                 0; 00) = 000
                                      `   P1 or P2    )
                                                          000

    Finally, canonicalization must account for the new semantics of or. In order
to permit replacement of variables by their values, we introduce a new compile-
time-only ternary conditional operator ?: for each variable bound on both sides
of the predicate. The rst argument is the predicate expression on the left-hand
side of the or expression; the second and third arguments are the variable's
values on each side of the or.
    Canonicalizing this new ?: expression requires ordering the tests canonically;
any ordering will do. This may necessitate duplication of some expressions, such
as transforming b ? e1 : (a ? e2 : e3 ) into a ? (b ? e1 : e2 ) : (b ? e1 : e3 ) so that those
two expressions are not considered distinct. With these two modi cations, the
tautology test is once again sound and complete.




                                              211
