               Orthogonal Connector Routing

            Michael Wybrow1 , Kim Marriott1 , and Peter J. Stuckey2
                    1
                      Clayton School of Information Technology,
               Monash University, Clayton, Victoria 3800, Australia,
            {Michael.Wybrow,Kim.Marriott}@infotech.monash.edu.au
                  2
                     National ICT Australia, Victoria Laboratory,
             Department of Computer Science & Software Engineering,
                University of Melbourne, Victoria 3010, Australia,
                            pjs@csse.unimelb.edu.au



       Abstract. Orthogonal connectors are used in a variety of common net-
       work diagrams. Most interactive diagram editors provide orthogonal con-
       nectors with some form of automatic connector routing. However, these
       tools use ad-hoc heuristics that can lead to strange routes and even routes
       that pass through other objects. We present an algorithm for computing
       optimal object-avoiding orthogonal connector routings where the route
       minimizes a monotonic function of the connector length and number of
       bends. The algorithm is efficient and can calculate connector routings
       fast enough to reroute connectors during interaction.



1     Introduction
Most interactive diagram editors provide some form of automatic connector rout-
ing between shapes whose position is fixed by the user. Usually the editor com-
putes an initial automatic route when the connector is created and updates this
each time the connector end-points (or attached shapes) are moved. Orthogonal
connectors, which consist of a sequence of horizontal and vertical line segments,
are a particularly common kind of connector, used in ER and UML diagrams
among others. However, in current diagramming tools that we are aware of,
automatic routing of orthogonal connectors uses ad-hoc heuristics that lead to
aesthetically unpleasing routes and unpredictable behaviour.
    For example, the graphic editors OmniGraffle Pro 5.1.1, and Dia 0.97, provide
automatic orthogonal connector routing but these routes may overlap other ob-
jects in the diagram. Both Microsoft Visio 2007, and ConceptDraw Pro 5 provide
object-avoiding orthogonal connector routing but in both applications connec-
tor routing does not use a predictable heuristic, such as minimizing distance or
number of segments. Furthermore, the routes are mostly updated only after ob-
ject movement has been completed, rather than as the action is happening. The
Graph layout library yFiles3 and demonstration editor yEd offers orthogonal
edge routing but routing is not maintained throughout further editing.
    Thus, we know of no interactive diagram authoring tool which ensures that
the orthogonal connectors are optimally routed in any meaningful sense. On the
3
    http://www.yworks.com/products/yfiles/
             (a)                           (b)                          (c)

Fig. 1. Three stage routing: (a) the orthogonal visibility graph, (b) the optimal con-
nector routes, (c) the final routes after centering and nudging. Arrows indicate routing
direction for connectors.

other hand, automatic routing of poly-line connectors is better supported: two
tools, Dunnart and Inkscape, provide real-time poly-line connector routing which
is optimal in the sense that it minimizes edge bends and connector length. Both
use the connector routing library libavoid4 which has three steps in connector
routing [1]. The first stage is to compute a visibility graph for the diagram
which contains a node for each vertex of each object in the diagram and an
edge between two nodes iff they are mutually visible. The second stage uses A?
search to find the optimal route through the visibility graph for each connector.
The third stage computes the visual representation of the connector. This three
step approach is also used in the Spline-o-matic library5 developed for GraphViz
which supports poly-line and Bezier curve edge routing [2].
    In this paper we describe how we have extended the connector routing library
libavoid to support orthogonal connector routing. The main contribution is to
show that a similar three step process to that used for poly-line connector rout-
ing can also be used for optimal orthogonal connector routing. We introduce the
orthogonal visibility graph in which edges in the graph represent horizontal or
vertical lines of visibility from the vertices and connector ports of each object
(Section 3). Connector routes are found using an A? search through the orthog-
onal visibility graph (Section 4). The algorithm is guaranteed to find a route for
each connector that is optimal in the sense that it minimizes bends and overall
connector length. Finally, the actual visual route is computed (Section 5). This
step orders and nudges apart the connectors in shared segments so as to ensure
that unnecessary crossings are not introduced and that crossings occur at the
start or end of the shared segment. It also tries to ensure that connectors pass
down the middle of “alleys” in the diagram when this does not lead to additional
cost. Figure 1 shows the three step process for an example layout. Our algorithms
are surprisingly efficient and fast enough to reroute connectors even during di-
4
    http://adaptagrams.sourceforge.net/libavoid/
5
    http://www.graphviz.org/Misc/spline-o-matic/


                                           2
rect manipulation of reasonably sized diagrams, thus giving instant feedback to
the diagram author (Section 6).

2    Problem Statement
For simplicity we model objects by their bounding rectangle and assume for
the purposes of complexity analysis that the number of connector points on
each object is a fixed constant. Also for simplicity, we assume that connectors
must start and end at distinct connection points. In practice, connectors are not
always connected to objects and may have end-points which are not connection
points. This can be handled by adding an extra node to the visibility graph for
this endpoint.
    We are interested in finding a poly-line route of horizontal and vertical seg-
ments for each connector. We wish to find routes that are short and which
have few bends. While we also wish to reduce connector crossings we will delay
consideration of this until Section 8. We assume our penalty function p(R) for
measuring the quality of a particular route R is a monotonic function f of the
length of the path, ||R||, and the number of bends (or equivalently segments) in
R, bends(R), i.e. p(R) = f(||R||, bends(R)). We require that the routes are valid :
they do not pass through objects and only contain right-angle bends.
    We use the Manhattan distance ||(v1 , v2 )||1 = |x1 − x2 | + |y1 − y2 | to measure
the shortest orthogonal route between points v1 = (x1 , y1 ) and v2 = (x2 , y2 ).
We make use of 4 cardinal directions: N, S, E, W. We assume the functions right,
left, and reverse defined by the mappings:

                    right = {N 7→ E, E 7→ S, S 7→ W, W 7→ N}
                      left = {N 7→ W, E 7→ N, S 7→ E, W 7→ S}
                  reverse = {N 7→ S, E 7→ W, S 7→ N, W 7→ E}

    We define the directions of point v2 = (x2 , y2 ) from v1 = (x1 , y1 ) as:

dirns(v1 , v2 ) = {N | y2 > y1 } ∪ {E | x2 > x1 } ∪ {S | y2 < y1 } ∪ {W | x2 < x1 }

Note dirns(v1 , v2 ) = {D} means v2 is on the line in direction D drawn from v1 .

3    Orthogonal Visibility Graph
The basis for our approach is the observation that when finding routes minimiz-
ing the penalty function we need only consider routes in the orthogonal visibility
graph. This is defined as follows.
    Let I be the set of interesting points (x, y) in the diagram, i.e. the connector
points and corners of the bounding box of each object. Let XI be the set of x
coordinates in I and YI the set of y coordinates in I. The orthogonal visibility
graph V G = (V, E) is made up of nodes V ⊆ XI × YI s.t. (x, y) ∈ V iff there
exists y 0 s.t. (x, y 0 ) ∈ I and there is no intervening object between (x, y) and
(x, y 0 ) and there exists x0 s.t. (x0 , y) ∈ I and there is no intervening object
between (x, y) and (x0 , y). There is an edge e ∈ E between each point in V to its
nearest neighbour to the north, south, east and west iff there is no intervening
object in the original diagram.


                                          3
    An example orthogonal visibility graph is shown in Figure 1(a). It is quite
different to the standard (non-orthogonal) visibility graph used for poly-line
routing. In particular, the standard visibility graph has O(n) nodes if there are
n objects in the diagram while the orthogonal visibility graph has O(n2 ) nodes.
Both have O(n2 ) edges.
Observation: Let R be a valid orthogonal route for a connector c. Then there
exists a valid orthogonal route R0 using edges in the orthogonal visibility graph
for c s.t. p(R0 ) ≤ p(R).
Proof. We simply take the route R and “shrink” each segment on the route onto
a path in the visibility graph to give R0 . By construction R0 is no longer than R
and has no additional bends.                                                     2
    The orthogonal visibility graph can be constructed using the following algo-
rithm. It has three steps:
1. Generate the interesting horizontal segments

       HI = { ((x, y), (x0 , y)) | (x, y), (x0 , y) ∈ I s.t. x ≤ x0
              and there is no intervening object between (x, y) and (x0 , y)}.

2. Generate the interesting vertical segments

       VI = { ((x, y), (x, y 0 )) | (x, y), (x, y 0 ) ∈ I s.t. y ≤ y 0
              and there is no intervening object between (x, y) and (x, y 0 )}.

3. Compute the orthogonal visibility graph by intersecting all pairs of segments
   from HI and VI . We note that this could be done lazily, however for simplicity
   we construct the entire visibility graph in one step.
Theorem 1. The orthogonal visibility graph can be constructed in O(n2 ) time
for a diagram with n objects using the above algorithm.
Proof. The interesting horizontal segments can be generated in O(n log n) time
where n is the number of objects in the diagram by using a variant of the line-
sweep algorithm from [3, 4]. This uses a vertical sweep through the objects in
the diagram, keeping a horizontal “scan line” list of open objects with each node
having references to its closest left and right neighbors. Interesting, horizontal
segments are generated, when an object is opened, closed, or a connection point
is reached. Dually, the interesting vertical segments can generated in O(n log n)
time by using a horizontal sweep. The last step takes O(n2 ) time since there are
O(n) interesting horizontal and vertical segments.                              2


4   Routing the Connector
We use an A? algorithm which iteratively builds longer and longer partial paths
that start from the source node s until the destination node d is reached. Partial
paths are stored in a priority queue and at each step the partial path with lowest
cost is taken from the queue and expanded. The expanded nodes are placed in
the queue. The process stops when the path chosen for expansion is already at


                                        4
                     3                  3
                2         2         2        4

        4           01                  34
                                                     4
                         destination
            3                                    3
                              (a)                                  (b)

Fig. 2. (a) Minimal required additional bends for reaching the destination with correct
direction from each point and direction. (b) The solid path is preferred to the dashed
path since it is the “initially straighter” path. The dotted line shows the middle of the
“alley” of possible paths for the middle segment of the connector.

d. The cost associated with each partial path is the cost of the partial path so
far plus a lower bound on the remaining cost to the destination.
    If we are only trying to minimize connector length, the only state we need to
know about the partial path is the position of its end. However, if the number
of bends is also part of the cost we also need to know the direction of the path.
Thus, entries in the priority queue have form (v, D, lv , bv , p, cv ) where v is the
node in the orthogonal visibility graph, D is the “direction of entry” to the node,
lv is the length of the partial path from s to v and bv the number of bends in
the partial path, p a pointer to the parent entry (so that the final path can be
reconstructed), and cv the cost of the partial path. There is at most one entry
popped from the queue for each (v, D) pair. When an entry (v, D, lv , bv , p, cv )
is scheduled for addition to the priority queue, it is only added if no entry with
the same (v, D) pair has been removed from the queue, i.e. is on the closed list.
And only the entry with lowest cost for each (v, D) pair is kept on the priority
queue. When we remove entry (v, D, lv , bv , p, cv ) from the priority queue we
 1. add the neighbour (v 0 , D) in the same direction with priority f(lv +||(v, v 0 )||1 +
    ||(v 0 , d)||1 , sv + sd );
 2. conditionally add the neighbours (v 0 , right(D)) and (v 0 , left(D)) at right an-
    gles to the entry with priority f(lv + ||(v, v 0 )||1 + ||(v 0 , d)||1 , sv + 1 + sd );
where sd is the estimation of the remaining segments required for the route from
(v 0 , D0 ) to (d, Dd ). Since some edges are useful only when searching in a particular
direction or for a specific point, we don’t add the left or right neighbours if the
extension of that visibility line neither passes right by an obstacle nor contains
the target endpoint. The estimation of the remaining segments required is: sd =
 0. if D0 = Dd and dirns(v 0 , d) = {D0 };
 1. if left(Dd ) = D0 ∨ right(Dd ) = D0 and D0 ∈ dirns(v 0 , d);
 2. if D0 = Dd and dirns(v 0 , d) 6= {D0 } but D0 ∈ dirns(v 0 , d), or D0 = reverse(Dd )
    and dirns(v 0 , d) 6= {Dd };
 3. if left(Dd ) = D0 ∨ right(Dd ) = D0 and D0 6∈ dirns(v 0 , d); and
 4. if D0 = reverse(Dd ) and dirns(v 0 , d) = {Dd }, or D0 = Dd and D0 6∈ dirns(v 0 , d).
Figure 2(a) shows all the possible scenarios for determining the remaining min-
imal number of bends. We note that Miriyala et al. [5] use a similar cost.
   Even taking into account number of bends, there are usually many alternate
routes of the same cost from source to destination. To make the routing behaviour


                                                         5
more predictable and faster we add a tie break for equal cost routes based on a
time stamp of when the entry was added to the priority queue. This means that
because the order in which neighbours is added is deterministic—straight, right,
left—there is a slight preference for right turns and also that the latest path is
extended in preference to earlier paths. See Figure 2(b).
    The worst-case complexity of the A? algorithm is that of a priority queue
based implementation of the shortest path algorithm over the orthogonal visi-
bility graph. Thus:
Theorem 2. The above algorithm will find an optimal valid route for a single
connector through the orthogonal visibility graph in O(n2 log n) time where the
diagram has n objects.                                                       2


5     Computing the visual representation
The third and last step in orthogonal connector routing is “nudging” of the
connectors to compute their actual position in the drawing. The importance of
this step is often overlooked, but feedback from users of Dunnart and Inkscape
suggests that it has a significant impact on the perception of layout quality. It
has two steps.

5.1   Ordering shared edges
The first aspect is determining the relative ordering of connectors in shared
edges. A consequence of routing connectors along the orthogonal visibility graph
is that multiple connectors will share edges of their paths. In order to make the
connector route clearer we want to nudge these paths apart to make the distinct
paths clear. It is important to do so in a manner which does not introduce
unnecessary crossings or bends in segments.
    We now explain our algorithm to generate a relative ordering of connectors in
shared edges. Initially we construct the graph of shared edges, that is the subset
of the edges in the visibility graph that have two or more connectors routed along
that edge (plus their incident nodes). We process each connected component in
the graph separately since each defines an independent subproblem in terms of
the parts of connectors whose routes enter and exit this connected component
of shared edges. Note that one connector may enter and exit the connected
component multiple times in which case each sub-route is treated as a separate
connector. Processing of each connected component has two steps.
    We first try and assign a uniform pseudo direction for each of these connector
sub-routes. This pseudo direction is independent of the actual direction of the
connector—it is simply used for route adjustment. Choose an arbitrary connector
sub-route A and fix its pseudo direction in an arbitrary direction. Now fix the
pseudo direction of a connector sub-route that shares an edge with A to have
the same direction as one of the shared edges. Follow the sub-route assigning the
same pseudo-direction until there is a conflict in which case we mark the sub-
route with a split point, reverse the pseudo-direction and continue following the
sub-route. Continue this until all sub-routes segments have a pseudo direction.
The whole process is O(e) where e is the number of edges in all the sub-routes
appearing in this tree.


                                        6
                       B                 D                           B             D                       B             D
                                                 C                                     C                                     C


           1       2        3        4       5
 A                                                   A   A                                 A   A                                 A


       B                                                     B                                     B
               D                 C                               D             C                       D             C


                           (a)                                           (b)                                   (c)

Fig. 3. (a) A set of orthogonal connectors which share edges, and (b) an ordering
of shared edges to minimize crossings, (c) an order of shared edges that minimizes
crossings and does not introduce additional segments.


    In practice, we have found that the pseudo-direction assignment for each
connector sub-route is almost always consistent. We say a set of connector paths
is path consistent if the pseudo-direction assignment is consistent for each con-
nected component of the shared edge graph.
    The next step is to determine for each shared edge a relative order, left to
right along the pseudo direction, of each of the connectors that share that edge.
We do this in an incremental fashion. Each edge starts with an empty sequence of
connectors. We choose an, as yet unconsidered, connector sub-route and process
each of its consistent sub-sections, one at a time (i.e. the sub-sections without
split point. We insert this consistent sub-section in the ordering for each shared
edge it makes use of. The key is that we will ensure that the necessary crossings
of this sub-section with other connectors only occur at the end of the last (in
the pseudo direction) shared edge between them, which is either at the end of
the connector or at a split point.
    Consider adding a connector c to a shared edge order O for edge e. We need to
insert c in O in the appropriate place. There are three subsequences of connectors
in O = L++S++R. Those that enter e (along the pseudo direction) from the left
of c, L, those that enter in the same direction as c, S, and those that enter from
the right, R. Now c already shares an edge e0 with connectors in S, so we can
project the order O0 for this edge onto the connectors in S ∪ {c} to determine an
order SL ++[c]++SR .6 The new order for edge s is hence L++SL ++[c]++SR ++R.
This step is O(e2 ).

Example 1. Consider the tree of shared edges shown if Figure 3(a). The ordering
of shared edges shown in Figure 3(b), has minimal connector crossings but adds
two extra segments in the route for D. The algorithm proceeds as follows. We as-
sign the pseudo direction left to right to connector A, and this propagates to the
other edges as shown by the arrow heads in Figure 3(c). The tree is path consis-
tent. We first add connector A as the unique route in each of edges 1–5. Next we
add connector B. Since it enters from below it is ordered after A in edge 1 and 2,
implicitly crossing A after edge 2. Similarly we add connector C. The resulting
ordering is ([A,B],[A,B],[A],[A,C],[A,C]). Next we add connector D, it is added
6
     It may be that when starting from a split point that while c already shares an edge
     e0 with connectors in S the ordering is not yet decided, in which case the ordering
     is determined by following the sub-route back across the split point and along the
     shared path to find the input ordering.


                                                                         7
last on edges 2 and 3 but since it enters above C it is ordered between A and
C in edge 4. The final resulting ordering is ([A,B],[A,B,D],[A,D],[A,D,C],[A,C]).
The resulting diagram is shown in Figure 3(c).                                 2

Theorem 3. If the shared edge graph is path consistent the above ordering algo-
rithm produces segment orders with the minimal number of connector crossings,
and all connector crossings are produced at the end of the last (in the pseudo
direction) shared edge of the two connectors.

Proof. (Sketch) Consider any pair of (sub-routes of) connectors A and B in a
tree of shared edges. The algorithm ensures that the relative order of A and B
is fixed in all their shared edges. By definition this order is defined by their left
to right order on entry to the shared edge. Hence the two connectors can only
cross at the exit of the shared edge, and only do so if that is necessary.         2

Theorem 4. If the shared edge graph is planar then the above ordering algo-
rithm produces a planar layout.

Proof. (Sketch) The relative order of shared edged is always preserved from one
endpoint of the connectors, thus a crossing will only be inserted if the relative
order of the two endpoints is different, in which case the graph is not planar. 2

5.2   Final placement
The final step in the layout is to determine the exact coordinates of the orthogo-
nal connector segments. This nudges connector routes a minimum distance apart
to show the relative order of connectors with shared segments and also ensures
that connectors pass down the middle of “alleys” in the diagrams when this does
not lead to additional cost or additional edge crossings.
    We collapse collinear segments in the connector routes into maximal hori-
zontal and vertical segments. This means that segments in the path alternate
horizontal and vertical alignment. We compute the horizontal and vertical po-
sition in separate passes. The horizontal pass works as follows and the vertical
pass is symmetric.
 1. Determine a desired horizontal position for all non-end segments in the con-
    nector. For the middle segment in an “S” or “Z” bend, this is the middle
    of the “alley” that the segment is in. For example, for the solid connector
    route shown in Figure 2(c), the dotted line shows the desired position for
    this segment. For the middle segment in an “=” or “<” bend, this is that of
    the vertex of the object that the segment bends around.
 2. Generate a set of horizontal separation constraints to ensure that segments
    maintain their current relative horizontal ordering with each other and with
    the other objects in the diagram. In the case of shared segments the sep-
    aration constraints impose the ordering determined previously. The con-
    straints are designed to enforce non-overlap and also to stop segments passing
    through each other and so introducing additional connector crossings.
 3. Project the desired values on to the separation constraints to find the hori-
    zontal position of the segments using the approximate projection algorithm
    satisfy VPSC from [3, 4].


                                         8
    The constraints and desired positions can be generated using a variant of the
line-sweep algorithm from [3] in O((n + s) log(n + s)) time where n is the number
of diagram objects and s the total number of vertical connector segments. The
approximate projection algorithm has O((s + n)2 ) worst-case complexity but in
practice O((s + n) log(s + n)) complexity [4].


6     Evaluation

We have implemented all algorithms in the open source libavoid library and
call them from the Dunnart diagram editor.7 The library is written in C++ and
compiled with gcc 4.2.1 at -O3. To investigate the performance of the algorithms
we have timed libavoid computing connector routes for a variety of diagrams.
    We used diagrams with various sized grid arrangements of nodes, where each
outside node is connected to the diagonally opposite node, and each node except
those on the right and bottom edge is connected to the node directly down and
to the right. We also used two larger random graphs and a protein topology
diagram. Figure 4 shows the layout of three of these evaluation diagrams.
    We measured the time to construct the orthogonal visibility graph, the time
to find all connector routes using the A? algorithm, the time to centre routes
in channels and perform nudging. The experiment was run on a MacBook Pro
with a 2.53 GHz Intel Core 2 Duo processor and 2GB of memory. The results are
shown in Table 1. We found for smaller diagrams with fewer than 100 nodes and
edges the routing process for the entire diagram can be performed in a fraction
of a second. Such smaller diagrams typify the sort of diagrams constructed in
interactive authoring software. The size and construction time for the visibility
graph in grid examples is notably smaller, as would be expected since the shapes
have visibility just to their neighbours. The time required to centre routes is
negligible, so should always be performed since it leads to more predictable
routes. The Graph-compact example is notable for the smaller visibility graph
and higher routing time, where both are due to the fact that many of the nodes
in this graph are close together and obscure visibility or block the optimal routes
of connectors.
7
    Dunnart is available for download from http://www.dunnart.org/.


Table 1. Average time taken to construct the orthogonal visibility graph, route all
connectors, and compute final positions of all connectors for grids and random graphs.

                 Diagram size VisGraph size    Times (in msec.) to compute
Diagram           |V | |E|     |V |   |E| VisGraph RouteConns FinalPos Total
Protein-1ABI        26     25 2,138 3,602        7            4        1    12
Grid-6x6            36     35   641     542      1            3        6    10
Grid-8x8            64     63 1,109     928      5          13        22    40
Grid-10x10         100     99 2,261 2,474        5          58        48   111
Grid-12x12         144   143 2,429 2,012        17          63        94   174
Graph-sparse       231   276 52,318 101,589    143          38       149   330
Graph-compact      305   413 51,187 98,801     144         261       605 1,010


                                          9
              7              9
                                                         13
                       8




                                                                             4*
                                                                        10



                                                                   11

                        Cl
                                                         12
                                 Nl                  6

              1


                                           5*
                        2




          3                           Nh



                   15                                         16



                   14



                       18



                  19



     20                                         21            Ch



    17




                                      (a)                                         (b)    (c)

 Fig. 4. Evaluation diagrams: (a) Protein-1ABI, (b) Grid-6x6 and (c) Graph-sparse.


7                  Related Work
Our work extends the previously mentioned research into three-step optimal
routing of poly-line connectors to handle orthogonal connector routing. There
has been some previous work on finding good orthogonal connector routings be-
tween fixed position shapes. The most closely related work in the graph drawing
literature is that of Miriyala et al. [5] who also use an A? algorithm for comput-
ing orthogonal connector paths. The main difference is that they search through
the rectangulation of the diagram rather than the orthogonal visibility graph.
The rectangulation is obtained by drawing vertical lines from the vertices of each
shape. The search is then through these rectangles. While superficially similar,
the rectangulation is actually quite different to the orthogonal visibility graph.
The key difference is that the rectangulation does not directly model horizontal
visibility. This means that their algorithm is heuristic and routes are not guar-
anteed to be optimal in any meaningful sense even if minimizing edge crossings
is ignored. A disadvantage of our approach is that the rectangulation is O(n) in
size while the orthogonal visibility graph is O(n2 ) in size for n shapes.
    Other related work includes algorithms for orthogonal graph layout. A stan-
dard technique is to solve a network flow problem in order to compute an orthog-
onal representation for the graph which minimizes the total number of connector
bends [6]. A compaction step is then applied to the orthogonal representation
to assign positions to the nodes which minimize the area of the drawing but do
not introduce additional crossings or overlap. The orthogonal graph layout algo-
rithm used in Tom Sawyer [7] uses a different approach. It first uses a heuristic to
position nodes on a grid so that connected nodes are close and no nodes (treated
as points) are on the same horizontal or vertical grid line. Next the edge routing
is chosen using a heuristic. Nodes may be expanded in size in this step to ensure
that edges require at most one bend. A compaction step is then applied.
    The key difference between orthogonal graph layout and the problem we
address is that in orthogonal graph layout the layout algorithm is responsible for
positioning nodes so as to minimize bends, while in our context nodes, i.e. shapes,
have fixed position and dimensions. We also mention incremental approaches to


                                                                                    10
orthogonal graph layout which incrementally construct the layout as vertices
(and all of their associated edges) are added one at a time [6, 7]. Again nodes
are allowed to move and the focus is on bend minimization.
    Orthogonal connector routing has been extensively studied in computational
geometry, in part because of its applications to circuit design. Lee et al. [8]
provides an extensive survey of algorithms for orthogonal connector routing,
while Lenguauer [9] provides an introduction to the algorithms used in circuit
layout.
    One of the earliest approaches in circuit design was so-called maze running
in which objects were assumed to be laid out on a uniform grid and a shortest
path algorithm was employed to find the shortest path in the grid [10]. The
complexity is proportional to the size of the grid. In our context, the grid needs
to be very fine because the user is free to place elements where they like and
so the time complexity is prohibitively high. Our approach can be considered a
modification to maze running in which we use a non-uniform grid whose mesh
size is tailored to the geometry of the diagram.
    Another approach used in circuit layout is to construct a track graph [11].
The construction is very similar to that of the orthogonal visibility graph. The
difference is that not all intersections of the interesting horizontal and vertical
segments are placed in the graph, thus the track graph is a sub-graph of the
orthogonal visibility graph. The track graph is not suitable for our purposes be-
cause it is only intended for finding minimal length connector paths (the primary
concern in circuit design).
    The problem we are addressing is finding a minimum-cost path (MCP) where
the cost is a function of the number of bend points and path length. Algorithms
with O(n log3/2 n) complexity for routing a single connector where n is the num-
ber of objects (assuming they are rectangles) are known for this problem [8].
However, it is fair to say that these algorithms are quite complex and dependent
on the kind of penalty function. Our approach has the advantage of simplicity
and, since A? search is a generic technique, it can be extended to more com-
plex penalty functions such as one, for instance, penalizing connector crossings
(see Section 8). Furthermore, our approach is analogous to the poly-line con-
nector routing approach already used in libavoid and so implementation effort
is reduced. While the worst-case complexity of our approach is O(n2 log n), in
practice because of the good heuristic used in the A? search, we have found
performance is perfectly acceptable.
    Another significant contribution of our paper is our algorithm for “nudging”
orthogonal connectors apart so as to improve the legibility of the layout. While
Miriyala et. al. do consider nudging, the issues and approach are quite different.
They do not consider the problem of how to avoid introducing unnecessary cross-
ings when separating connectors with a shared path. Our algorithm for ordering
connectors in shared paths so as to avoid introducing unnecessary crossings is
related to algorithms for metro-line crossing [12, 13]. The main difference is that
we have the additional requirement that the ordering should not introduce un-
necessary bends in the layout and so crossings are only allowed to occur when a
connector enters or leaves the shared path, but not in the shared path itself.

                                        11
8    Conclusion
Most diagram editors and graph construction tools provide some form of auto-
matic orthogonal connector routing. However the routes are typically computed
using ad-hoc techniques and are not usually updated during direct manipula-
tion. We present algorithms for computing optimal object-avoiding orthogonal
connector routings where optimality is w.r.t some monotonic function of the con-
nector length and number of bends. Our approach is based on first computing
an orthogonal visibility graph for the diagram, then an optimal route using an
A? search, followed by computation of the precise connector path. The approach
is surprisingly fast and allow us to recalculate optimal connector routings fast
enough to reroute connectors interactively for use in authoring applications.
    We plan to extend our work to incorporate a cost for edge crossings in the
penalty function. An advantage of using the orthogonal visibility graph and the
shared path ordering step is that it allows easy identification of edge crossings.
Thus computing how many times a new connector route crosses the previously
routed connectors can be done simply and with little additional overhead.
    Acknowledgments: NICTA is funded by the Australian Government as repre-
sented by the Department of Broadband, Communications and the Digital Economy
and the Australian Research Council. We acknowledge the support of the ARC through
Discovery Project Grant DP0987168.

References
 1. Wybrow, M., Marriott, K., Stuckey, P.J.: Incremental connector routing. In: GD
    2005. Volume 3843 of LNCS., Springer (2006) 446–457
 2. Dobkin, D.P., Gansner, E.R., Koutsofios, E., North, S.C.: Implementing a general-
    purpose edge router. In: GD 1996. Volume 1353 of LNCS., Springer (1997) 262–271
 3. Dwyer, T., Marriott, K., Stuckey, P.: Fast node overlap removal. In: GD 2005.
    Volume 3843 of LNCS., Springer (2006) 153–164
 4. Dwyer, T., Marriott, K., Stuckey, P.: Fast node overlap removal—correction. In:
    GD 2005. Volume 4372 of LNCS., Springer (2007) 446–447
 5. Miriyala, K., Hornick, S.W., Tamassia, R.: An incremental approach to aesthetic
    graph layout. In: CASE ’93, IEEE Computer Society (Jul 1993) 297–308
 6. Di Battista, G., Eades, P., Tamassia, R., Tollis, I.G.: Graph Drawing: Algorithms
    for the Visualization of Graphs. Prentice-Hall, Inc. (1999)
 7. Biedl, T.C., Madden, B., Tollis, I.G.: The three-phase method: A unified approach
    to orthogonal graph drawing. IJCGA 10(6) (2000) 553–580
 8. Lee, D., Yang, C., Wong, C.: Rectilinear paths among rectilinear obstacles. Discrete
    Applied Mathematics 70(3) (1996) 185–216
 9. Lengauer, T.: Combinatorial Algorithms for Integrated Circuit Layout. John Wiley
    & Sons, Inc., New York, NY, USA (1990)
10. Lee, C.Y.: An algorithm for path connections and its applications. IRE Transac-
    tions on Electronic Computers EC-10(2) (1961) 346–365
11. Wu, Y.F., Widmayer, P., Schlag, M.D.F., Wong, C.K.: Rectilinear shortest paths
    and minimum spanning trees in the presence of rectilinear obstacles. IEEE Trans-
    actions on Computers 36(3) (1987) 321–331
12. Argyriou, E., Bekos, M., Kaufmann, M., Symvonis, A.: Two polynomial time
    algorithms for the metro-line crossing minimization problem. In: GD 2008. Volume
    5417 of LNCS., Springer (2009) 336–347
13. Bekos, M., Kaufmann, M., Potika, K., Symvonis, A.: Line crossing minimization
    on metro maps. In: GD 2007. Volume 4875 of LNCS., Springer (2008) 231



                                          12
